Title: Exploring comorbid depression and high blood pressure association to the gut microbiome taxa and functionality. 

Introduction & Background: Depression and hypertension are prevalent chronic conditions worldwide, each contributing 
substantially to global mortality. Depression is estimated to affect over 300 million people (1), while hypertension affects 
more than 1.4 billion adults (2). Despite being studied as separate conditions, one being psychiatric while the other is 
classified as cardiovascular, recent research suggests they may be linked through shared inflammatory, metabolic, and 
endocrinal pathways (3). Furthermore, they have also been linked to alterations in the gut microbiome, with specific findings 
on distinct compositions (4). Research by Bruce. R has established how patients with both depression and hypertension possess 
a microbiota with co-occurrence of several bacteria with Streptococcus salivarium, in which the composition is associated with 
sodium absorption and inflammasome induction (5). It has also been found that this ecology is distinct from patients with 
depression or hypertension alone (5). However, in depth analysis of the functionality of each distinct bacteria in each of the 
4 cohorts (patients with both disorders, patients with either one, or neither) could be further explored. This project aims 
to explore the interlinkage of depression and hypertension in depth, and it’s influence on the functionality of the gut 
microbiota.

References:
(1) World Health Organization. 2023. Depression fact sheet. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/depression
(2) World Health Organization. 2023. Hypertension fact sheet. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hypertension
(3) Penninx BW, et al. 2021. Depression and cardiovascular disease: epidemiological evidence and biological mechanisms. 
Lancet Psychiatry 8: 924–940.
(4) Zheng P, et al. 2016. Gut microbiome remodeling induces depressive-like behaviors through the gut–brain axis. 
Mol Psychiatry 21: 786–796
(5) Bruce R. 2021. Depressive hypertension: A proposed human endotype of hypertension with depression. 
Am Heart J 238:1–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2021.05.002
